 Real life business processes change over time, in both planned and unexpected ways. The detection of these changes is crucial for organizations to ensure that the expected and the real behavior are as similar as possible. These changes over time are called concept drift and its detection is a big challenge in process mining since the inherent complexity of the data makes difﬁcult distinguishing between a change and an anomalous execution. In this paper, we present C2D2 (Conformance Checking-based Drift Detection), a new approach to detect sudden control-ﬂow changes in the process models from event traces. C2D2 combines discovery techniques with conformance checking methods to perform an ofﬂine detection. Our approach has been validated with a synthetic benchmarking dataset formed by 68 logs, showing an improvement in the accuracy (Fscore) while maintaining a minimum delay in the drift detection.
I. INTRODUCTION
Real life processes are not immutable. Instead, they evolve to adapt to changes in their context, as new regulations or new consumption patterns. Changes can be planned by the organisation, but also happen unexpectedly.In the ﬁrst case, the impact on the process can be computed and minimized. But in the second case, it may lead to wrong decisions because of outdated information. Thus, organizations should put in place prevention measures to detect when something is running differently from planned to reduce this negative impact. These unforeseen changes over time are known as concept drifts, which is one of the challenges presented in the Process Mining Manifesto [1]. Changes can be classiﬁed based on their distribution over time [2]: (i) sudden drifts (Figure 1a), which means that the new concept replaces totally the previous one; (ii) gradualdrifts (Figure 1b), where the new and the old concepts coexist for some time; and (iii) incremental drifts (Figure 1c), when the transition from the oldest concept to the newest one passes through some intermediate states that are, usually, some kind of combination from both. Furthermore, when changes can be repeated over time, periodically switching between concepts, the change is classiﬁed as a recurrent drift (Figure 1d). In this paper, we focus on sudden drift detection. In addition, based on how data are processed [3], concept drift can be: (i) ofﬂine, when change detection is made post– mortem, being all data available from the beginning, and (ii) online, when change detection is made on-the-ﬂy, and new data
are processed just when it is generated. In this paper we focus on ofﬂine concept drift, which additionally faces two challenges: a) the inherent complexity of process models, that can contain and combine different structures such as sequences, loops, parallel branches and choices; and b) the distinction between a change and an outlier, which is not always clear and may depend on the application domain. Although, some authors have proposed different approaches for concept drift detection in process mining [3]–[18], identifying all the possible change patterns [19] with a short delay, allowing organizations to know exactly when the change took place and helping in the identiﬁcation of the reasons that caused the change,is still a challenge.In addition,many approachesare unable to detect all change patterns, being this essential to reduce the cases when a change stays ignored to the organization. Another issue in some proposals is their high dependence on the end user, who is required to have some a-priori knowledge of the process structure or skills to identify accurately the drift within a set of possibilities. In order to reduce the aforementioned issues, in this paper we present C2D2, a novel and fully automatic approach based on discovery and conformance checking teckniques for ofﬂine detection of sudden concept drifts in the control-ﬂow of process models. The method starts by deﬁning a reference window, that will serve as a ground truth. Then traces are processed by a discovery algorithm to extract the corresponding process model. To process the remaining traces, the window is slided over the log, updating conformance metrics related to that process model. With these conformance values a regression is computed, and when the measurements decrease signiﬁcantly a drift is detected. The underlying idea is that the value from the conformance metrics computed over the reference model and the new traces should decrease when the latter comes from a modiﬁed process, being this enough to determine if a change exists or not with a low delay. Speciﬁcally, the main contribution of this paper is the use of conformance metrics, in particular, ﬁtness and precision, to detect changes in processes, which is a novel and unexplored approach so far. Namely, we propose the use of ﬁtness metrics to detect changes that include traces with behaviornotsupportedbythe currentprocessmodel, and the use of precision metrics to detect changes that implies behavior from the model disappearing from the real executions.